.TH HYPRWAT 6 "November 2025" "hyprwat 0.9.2" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
hyprwat \- A Hyprland menu utility to present selectable options with a customizable interface
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B hyprwat
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fIid[:displayName][*]\fR]...
.br
.B hyprwat
--input [\fIhint\fR]
.br
.B hyprwat
--password [\fIhint\fR]
.br
.B hyprwat
--wifi
.br
.B hyprwat
--audio
.br
.B hyprwat
--custom \fIconfig.yaml\fR
.br
.B hyprwat
--wallpaper \fI~/.local/share/wallpapers\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B hyprwat
is a lightweight Wayland-native popup menu that presents selectable options
or input prompts at the current cursor position. It integrates cleanly with
the Hyprland compositor and can be used to build interactive menus for
system controls, Wi-Fi networks, audio devices, or any scriptable UI
selection task.
In its default menu mode,
.B hyprwat
displays a list of options, one of which may be preselected.
It can also present text input or password dialogs, automatically populate
menus from system resources such as Wi-Fi networks or PipeWire audio devices,
or render fully custom menus from YAML configuration files with support for
hierarchical submenus, multiple widget types, and flexible actions.
.SH MODES
.TP
.B MENU MODE (default)
You can pass a list of items as command-line arguments in the form:
.RS
.nf
id[:displayName][*]
.fi
.RE
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
\fBid\fR: Required identifier (used internally)
.IP \(bu 2
\fBdisplayName\fR: Optional text label (defaults to id)
.IP \(bu 2
\fB*\fR: Optional suffix marking this item as initially selected
.RE
If no arguments are passed, menu items may be provided on standard input,
one per line, in the same format.
.EX
$ hyprwat performance:Performance* balanced:Balanced powersave:PowerSaver
$ echo -e "wifi0:Home*\\nwifi1:Work\\nwifi2:Other" | hyprwat
.EE
.TP
.B INPUT MODE
Show a text input prompt with optional hint text.
.EX
$ hyprwat --input "Enter your name"
.EE
.TP
.B PASSWORD MODE
Show a password input prompt (masked input).
.EX
$ hyprwat --password "WiFi Passphrase"
.EE
.TP
.B WIFI MODE
Scan and display available Wi-Fi networks for selection.
If a network requires authentication, a password prompt will follow.
.EX
$ hyprwat --wifi
.EE
.TP
.B AUDIO MODE
Show available audio input/output devices (PipeWire) and select one.
.EX
$ hyprwat --audio
.EE
.TP
.B WALLPAPER MODE
Select an image file from the specified directory to set as the desktop wallpaper. This requires hyprpaper.
.EX
$ hyprwat --wallpaper ~/.local/share/wallpapers
.EE
.TP
.B CUSTOM MODE
Render a fully custom menu from a YAML configuration file. Custom menus
support multiple widget types (buttons, inputs, sliders, checkboxes, color
pickers, etc.), hierarchical submenus, keyboard shortcuts, and various
action types including command execution and submenu navigation.
.EX
$ hyprwat --custom ~/.config/hyprwat/main.yaml
.EE
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR -h , " --help"
Show help message and exit.
.TP
.BR --input " [hint]"
Display an input field with optional hint text.
.TP
.BR --password " [hint]"
Display a password input prompt (masked).
.TP
.BR --wifi
Show Wi-Fi network selection mode.
.TP
.BR --audio
Show audio input/output device selection mode.
.TP
.BR --wallpaper
Select an image file from the specified directory to set as the desktop wallpaper.
.TP
.BR --custom " \fIconfig.yaml\fR"
Load and render a custom menu from the specified YAML configuration file.
See
.B CUSTOM MENU FORMAT
below for configuration syntax.
.SH CUSTOM MENU FORMAT
Custom menus are defined in YAML format and support rich, interactive UIs
with hierarchical navigation. The configuration file structure:
.PP
.B Basic Structure:
.EX
title: "Menu Title"
width: 400          # Optional fixed width
height: 300         # Optional fixed height

theme:              # Optional theme overrides
  hover_color: "#3366B3FF"
  active_color: "#3366B366"

sections:           # List of widgets
  - type: text
    content: "Label text"
    style: bold   # normal, bold, italic
  
  - type: separator
  
  - type: button
    label: "Button Label"
    action:
      type: execute
      command: "command to run"
      close_on_success: true

shortcuts:          # Optional keyboard shortcuts
  - key: "Escape"
    action:
      type: cancel
.EE
.PP
.B Supported Widget Types:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
.B text
\- Static text label (supports bold/italic)
.IP \(bu 2
.B separator
\- Visual divider line
.IP \(bu 2
.B button
\- Clickable button
.IP \(bu 2
.B selectable_list
\- List of selectable items
.IP \(bu 2
.B input
\- Text input field
.IP \(bu 2
.B checkbox
\- Boolean toggle
.IP \(bu 2
.B slider
\- Numeric slider with min/max range
.IP \(bu 2
.B combo
\- Dropdown selection box
.IP \(bu 2
.B color_picker
\- Color selection widget
.RE
.PP
.B Supported Action Types:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
.B execute
\- Execute shell command
.IP \(bu 2
.B submit
\- Return a value and exit
.IP \(bu 2
.B cancel
\- Cancel and exit
.IP \(bu 2
.B submenu
\- Navigate to another YAML config file
.IP \(bu 2
.B back
\- Return to parent menu
.RE
.PP
.B Submenu Example:
.EX
# main.yaml
sections:
  - type: button
    label: "Power Settings"
    action:
      type: submenu
      path: "power.yaml"  # Relative or absolute path

# power.yaml
title: "Power Settings"
sections:
  - type: selectable_list
    items:
      - id: "performance"
        label: "Performance"
        action:
          type: execute
          command: "powerprofilesctl set performance"
  
  - type: button
    label: "â† Back"
    action:
      type: back

shortcuts:
  - key: "Escape"
    action:
      type: back
.EE
.PP
Submenus support unlimited nesting depth. The Escape key navigates back
through the menu hierarchy, exiting only from the root level.
Action commands support token replacement: \fB{value}\fR, \fB{index}\fR,
and \fB{state}\fR are replaced with widget values during execution.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Select a power profile:
.EX
$ hyprwat performance:"Performance"* balanced:"" power-saver:"Power Saver"
.EE
.TP
Provide menu items via stdin:
.EX
$ echo -e "wifi0:Home*\\nwifi1:Work\\nwifi2:Other" | hyprwat
.EE
.TP
Prompt for input:
.EX
$ NAME=$(hyprwat --input "Enter name")
.EE
.TP
Select Wi-Fi or audio device:
.EX
$ hyprwat --wifi
$ hyprwat --audio
.EE
.TP
Launch a custom control panel:
.EX
$ hyprwat --custom ~/.config/hyprwat/control-panel.yaml
.EE
.TP
Create a power management menu:
.EX
$ cat > ~/.config/hyprwat/power.yaml << 'EOF'
title: "Power Management"
sections:
  - type: text
    content: "Select power profile:"
  
  - type: selectable_list
    items:
      - id: "perf"
        label: "âš¡ Performance"
        action:
          type: execute
          command: "powerprofilesctl set performance"
          close_on_success: true
      - id: "balanced"
        label: "âš–ï¸  Balanced"
        selected: true
        action:
          type: execute
          command: "powerprofilesctl set balanced"
          close_on_success: true
      - id: "saver"
        label: "ðŸ”‹ Power Saver"
        action:
          type: execute
          command: "powerprofilesctl set power-saver"
          close_on_success: true
EOF

$ hyprwat --custom ~/.config/hyprwat/power.yaml
.EE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/hyprwat/hyprwat.conf
Optional configuration file for theme customization.  
Uses simple INI syntax to define fonts, colors, and window style.
.TP
.I ~/.config/hyprwat/*.yaml
Custom menu configuration files. Can be organized hierarchically
with submenus referencing other YAML files via relative or absolute paths.
.SH REQUIREMENTS
Wayland compositor (tested with Hyprland),
C++20 compiler, EGL/OpenGL, Fontconfig, xkbcommon,
PipeWire, sdbus-c++, and yaml-cpp.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR hyprland (1),
.BR waybar (1),
.BR nmcli (1),
.BR pactl (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Written by Zack Bartel <zack@bartel.com>
.SH LICENSE
MIT License.  
Source available at:
.UR https://github.com/zackb/hyprwat
.UE
